---
title: Biotaphy Metacommunity Phylogenetic Analysis (MCPA)
image_path: ""
layout: page
---

# Contents
{:.no_toc}

* Will be replaced with the ToC, excluding the "Contents" header
{:toc}

## Biotaphy Metacommunity Phylogenetic Analysis (MCPA) 

### What is the analysis?

  The metacommunity phylogenetic analysis is a "method that aims to evaluate 
  the interaction between phylogenetic 
  structure, historical biogeographic events and environmental filtering in 
  driving species distributions in a 
  large-scale metacommunity".

### What are the inputs

  The MCPA process requires an incidence matrix, a phylogenetic tree, 
  environment data and biogeographic hypotheses.  All
  of the inputs should be encoded as matrices.  
  
  Each row in the incidence matrix represents a site and each column represents 
  a species.  The value of each cell should  
  be either zero if the species is not found at that site or one if it is.
  
  The phylogenetic tree must be binary and [ultrametric](/terms) and then is 
  encoded with the rows representing the tips of the 
  tree and the columns representing the internal nodes.  For each node / column, 
  each tip that occurs in that clade should 
  be encoded with a value relative to its branch length.  One of the system 
  clades should be encoded with positive values
  and one should be encoded with negative values (which is which is arbitrarily 
  chosen) the sum of all of the values in 
  each column should be zero.
  
  The environmental data matrix should be encoded as a matrix of site rows and 
  environmental variable columns.  The sites
  in this matrix should match the sites in the incidence matrix.  The values of 
  each cell should be the value of the 
  variable at that particular site.
  
  The biogeographic hypotheses should be encoded as a matrix with rows 
  representing sites and columns representing 
  hypotheses.  Each hypothesis should be encoded as a Helmert contrast and 
  should be tertiary.  For example, there should 
  be two sides of the hypothesis (ex. one island or the other).  Arbitrarily 
  select one side to be encoded with 
  positive values and one with negative values.  Set the value of each cell to 
  be the corresponding side the site falls
  within.  If the site does not fall in either side, the value should be set to 
  zero.

### How does Biotaphy create these inputs

  Biotaphy uses presence-absence matrices for the incidence matrix in the MCPA 
  computation.  These PAMs are created by
  generating a species distribution model for each of the taxa that are to be 
  included.  These models are limited by 
  masking the potential distribution region by the convex hull around the 
  observed occurrence data intersected with the 
  ecoregions that those points fall within.  Without this step, the generated 
  PAM would only be correlated with the 
  environment data since it was used to generate the models.
  
  Phylogenetic trees are uploaded (or retrieved from a service) as a NEXUS file.  
  We ensure that the tree is binary by 
  resolving any polytomies that may exist within it.  The tree must be 
  ultrametric if it has branch lengths.  If it does
  not contain branch lengths, the structure itself of the tree can be used to 
  encode the tree.  
  
  The environmental data matrix is generated by intersecting the environmental 
  data with the shapegrid used to generate
  the PAM.  The value for each of these cells is determined by creating a 
  weighted average of all of the raster cells that 
  fall within each site.
  
  The biogeographic hypotheses matrix is generated from a set of hypothesis 
  shapefiles.  For each shapefile, an event field
  can be specified indicating what features should be considered to be part of 
  the same hypothesis.  If there is no event 
  field specified, each feature is treated as its own hypothesis.  If there are 
  only two, then they are taken as opposing
  sides of a hypothesis.  If there are more than two, they are split into 
  separate hypotheses.
  
### Computations

  Performing an MCPA computation can take a lot of computing horsepower, 
  especially for larger matrices.  The computation
  generates several (10,000) semi-partial correlation matrices from permutations 
  of the incidence data to assess the 
  impact of each environmental variable and biogeographic hypothesis and 
  determine what values are signficant.  To improve 
  performance, these operations are split into chunks of N runs (default 100) 
  that are then spread across the processing 
  nodes and compute cores of a cluster.  The results of these computations are 
  then aggregated and summarized before being 
  returned to the user.

### What are the outputs

  The outputs of the MCPA process are in the form of a stack of node by 
  predictor matrices, where "node" is an internal node
  of the phylogenetic tree and "predictor" is either an environmental variable 
  or a biogeographic hypothesis.  The first 
  layer of this stack is the observed semi-partial correlations between each 
  node and each predictor.  The cells of the 
  second layer are frequency values indicating how often the randomized 
  incidence matricies produced larger semi-partial
  correlation values for each node - predictor combination.   Finally, the third 
  layer indicates if the semi-partial 
  correlation value of each cell in the observed matrix should be considered 
  significant or not.

### How are these outputs interpreted?

  The results of this analysis are interpreted by first looking at the the 
  significance matrix.  For every cell that is 
  "true" the semi-partial correlation between that internal tree node and that 
  predictor is significant.  After determining 
  which values are significant, look at the corresponding semi-partial 
  correlation values at those combinations.  The closer 
  that the absolute value of the cell is to one, the greater the impact of that 
  predictor on the node, meaning one sister 
  clade of that node reacts more positively to that predictor than the other 
  showing the effect of that evolutionary process.
  These values can show how clades evolved to match climate conditions as well 
  as show which organisms are more vagile to
  disperse to overcome the legacy of previous biogeographic events.

### Reference 

Paper provided in the USB drive and linked below:

[Leibold, M. A., Economo, E. P., & Peres‐Neto, P. (2010). Metacommunity 
phylogenetics: separating the roles of environmental filters and historical 
biogeography. Ecology letters, 13(10), 1290-1299.](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1461-0248.2010.01523.x)




